So we started adding the header and I mentioned we would need the display property to change the way
our list items are positioned and we do.
Now let's first of all start by being able to target these list items and to do so,
I'll give them a CSS class,
so I'll add the class attribute to a list item
and now you can again use any class name you want.
I will use a certain way of writing classes which is called BEM for block element modifier,
something I will explain in detail at the end of the course in these patterns and best practices part
where I will also explore that,
it's just a specific way of writing classes that should ensure that we don't accidentally reuse class
names and that they're very clear about what we do.
Hence what I'll name them or what I'll name this class is main-nav and then __item,
again you can give this any name you want,
this just is kind of following the theme where we're in the main navigation because this will become
the main nav and then in there
and it's just separated by specification of that BEM model I'm following,
there we are in a single list item.
You can again name this in which ever way you want.
I'll copy that class assignment and add it to all my list items,
I'll also add it to the unordered list though there I will name it main-nav__items
because
this is my list of items
and then finally once we already add it, I'll also add it to the nav element and there it will be just
the class main-nav
and that's kind of the pattern I want to use here,
main-nav, main-nav__item, main-nav__items.
So with that, we get a bunch of classes with which we can work,
we came here to see the display property in action though, right,
so how does that work?
The display property allows us to change the behavior of an element from block to inline or even to
inline block which is a mixture or to none to remove it from the DOM even.
Now step-by-step, what does this all mean? In HTML,
we got inline and we got block level elements, example for inline elements would be anchor tags,
they are rendered inline.
If we have two anchor tags after each other as here for customers and we reload the page, we see they're rendered
in the same line,
they don't take the full entire width as block level elements do. That
on the other hand is what block level elements do.
If we inspect a list item, so not the anchor tag side of it, just the list item,
you can see the blue content takes the full available width minus margin padding, what's taken up by other
elements surrounding it,
the anchor tag again only takes the width its content needs. Both actually use the box model, though for
the inline element, we can't really set a margin top and bottom for example because that's not how inline
elements work,
they are not positioned in the flow like block level elements,
they don't take a new line necessarily,
hence margin top and bottom is difficult because they might be inline with another element.
So that's the difference
and we can change that behavior with the display property,
here's an example.
Let's go to that second customer and let's quickly, for demo purposes, change the style with display to
block. Again the default value for an anchor tag would be inline
but here, I change it to block.
If we do that and we reload the page, you actually see that this second customer jumped into a new
row because customer,
the second one, is now turned into a block level element and hence, it behaves like one.
It takes the full entire width, the first one still is an inline element but that doesn't matter because
the second one is a block level,
it doesn't fit into the same line as the first one
even though that one is still inline
but the second one isn't.
Now that what we enforced with display block is actually the default for block level elements like unordered
list, list item, nav, section and so on. With the display property, we can change it. Now one other way
we can change it is we can set to none. If we set this on the second customer and we reload,
you'll see it's removed and it's not only invisible or transparent, it's also taken out of the document
flow
as you can tell by the fact that start hosting closed the gap. If we inspect it here,
this is the element which has display none, it's still part of the DOM though
so it's not removed from there, just from the visible document flow.
The idea behind display none is that it's especially useful if we use it in conjunction with Javascript
to for example show it after a button was clicked,
this allows us to create modals which only show up on certain action, something we'll also do later.
So that is none, that is block and that is inline, changing inline to block and the other way round is not that
useful in many cases because elements behave in a certain way for a good reason
but there is a fourth option and that's the option that's now really useful to us.
We can set our class which we assign to a list item,
so the main-nav__item class, we can set that in our CSS code,
don't forget the dot, to display inline-block,
this mixes the behavior of both inline and block level elements. Like inline elements,
these elements can go next to each other now but they still behave like block level elements when it
comes to setting top and bottom margins, setting paddings, things that are not possible on inline elements.
If we change it to such an element, we can go back to the code and after reloading, we see that now the
list items are setup in one line because again, they behave like an inline element such that they only
take as much width as their content sheets and they fit into one line but they still have a box where we
can set a padding and so on.
And you can see this if you actually try setting up padding for example on the anchor tag,
so padding 20 pixels,
then you'll see it's applied to the left and right
but just as margin top and bottom, it doesn't really have a great effect here.
If you on the other hand set that on the surrounding list item which is inline block, then you see it's
also applied to the left and right but to the top and bottom,
it's also having an effect now,
it's pushing the elements down.
So that's the difference.
We can style the list items still like block level elements but they sit next to each other like inline
elements which is a great way of allowing us to create navigation here. Later in the course, we'll also
learn about other tools mainly flexbox which is even better to position elements next to each other
but for now, inline block is a great start.